Isolated synchronous deinit and asynchronous deinit (#2035)
swiftlang/swift-evolution: proposals/0371-isolated-synchronous-deinit.md

}
```

Note that since Swift 5.8 escaping `self` from `deinit` [reliably triggers fatal error](https://github.com/apple/swift/commit/108f780).

If needed, it is still possible to manually start a task from `deinit`. But any data needed by the task should be copied to avoiding capturing `self`:

```swift
actor Clicker {
  var count: Int = 0

  isolated deinit {
    Task { [count] in 
      await logClicks(count)
    }
  }
}
```

## Detailed design

> ### Runtime

Reviewer: Honestly, I think we could strike most of this section, it wades a bit heavily into implementation details that aren't necessary to understand the language model, I think. How about:
> This proposal introduces a new runtime function which ensures that the body of an `isolated deinit` is running on the correct executor by wrapping the execution in a task-less ad hoc job, if needed. If no switching is needed (i.e., we are already executing on the appropriate executor), then the `deinit` is executed synchronously. Otherwise, the task-less job is schedule with the same priority as the current task/thread that release the last strong reference to the object.

Destroying `deinit` is not affected by this proposal.

### Rules for computing isolation

For backwards compatibility, isolation of the class is not propagated to the synchronous `deinit` by default:

```swift
@MainActor
class Foo {
  deinit {} // not isolated
}
```

To opt-in into isolation propagation, proposal allows `isolated` attribute to be applied to `deinit` declaration. This is an existing attribute, which currently can be applied only to function arguments, but has a different meaning there. When applied to a function argument it indicates a parameter which contains an instance of the actor which function should be isolated to.

```swift
@MainActor
class Foo {
  isolated deinit {} // Isolated on MainActor.shared
}

actor Bar {
  isolated deinit {} // Isolated on self
}
```

It is an error to use `isolated` attribute on a `deinit`, if containing class has no isolation.

```swift
class Foo {
  // error: deinit is marked isolated, but containing class Foo is not isolated to an actor
  isolated deinit {}
}
```

> If containing class is not isolated, it is still possible to use global actor attribute on `deinit`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the containing type is not isolated, it is still possible to use a global actor attribute on `deinit`.
```

Author: I don't want to use `type` to avoid getting false idea that this feature can be used with move-only value types.

```swift
class Foo {
  @MainActor deinit {}
}
```

> It is also possible to use explicit global actor attribute, to override isolation of the containing class. Using global actor attribute on deinit to specify the same isolation as in the containing class, may be seen as a violation of DRY, but technically is valid and does not produce any warnings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is also possible to use an explicit global actor attribute, to override the isolation of the containing type. Using a global actor attribute on `deinit` to specify the same isolation as in the containing type may be seen as a violation of DRY, but technically is valid and does not produce any warnings.
```

```swift
class Base {
  // Will be called only on MainActor
  @MainActor func foo() {}

  // Can be called from any executor
  nonisolated deinit {}
}

class Derived: Base {
  // Can be called from any executor, including MainActor
  nonisolated override func foo() {}

  @MainActor deinit {
    // Can we call super.deinit()?
  }
}

let x: Base = Derived()
x.foo() // Can we call Derived.foo()?
```

Types that don't perform custom actions in `deinit` and only need to release references don't need isolated `deinit`. Releasing child objects can be done from any thread. If those objects are concerned about isolation, they should adopt isolation themselves. Implicit deinitializers cannot opt-in into isolation, so they are nonisolated by default.

```swift
class Foo {
  var bar: Bar

  // implicit deinit is nonisolated
  // release of Bar can happen on any thread/task

>   // Bar is responsible to its own isolation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // Bar is responsible for its own isolation.
```

### Exporting to Objective-C

`deinit` isolation is relevant only when subclassing. Since Objective-C code cannot subclass Swift classes, the generated  `*-Swift.h` files contain no addition information about new `deinit` features.

### Interaction with ObjC runtime.

All Objective-C-compatible Swift classes have `dealloc` method synthesized, which acts as a thunk to `__deallocating_deinit`. Normally when calling `super.deinit` from `__deallocating_deinit`, it is done by sending Objective-C `dealloc` message using `objc_msgSuper`.

This ensures maximum possible compatibility with Objective-C, but comes with some runtime cost.

> For isolated synchronous `deinit`, this cost increases. For each class in the hierarchy `swift_task_deinitOnExecutor()` will be called, but slow path can be taken only for the most derived class. Other classes in the hierarchy would be doing redundant actor checks. To avoid this, isolated deinit bypasses Objective-C runtime when calling isolated `deinit` of Swift base classes, and calls `__isolated_deallocating_deinit` directly. Compatibility with Objective-C is preserved only on Swift<->Objective-C boundary in either direction.

Reviewer: This is also a bit implementation-y, any way we could rephrase in terms of the actual language model?

Author: Reworded a bit, but it still contains mentions `__isolated_deallocating_deinit`.

This is still sufficient to create ObjC subclasses in runtime, as KVO does. Or swizzle `dealloc` of the most derived class of an instance. But swizzling `dealloc` of intermediate Swift classes might not work as expected.

### Isolated synchronous deinit of default actors

When deinitializing an instance of default actor, `swift_task_deinitOnExecutor()` attempts to take actor's lock and execute deinit on the current thread. If previous executor was another default actor, it remains locked. So potentially multiple actors can be locked at the same time. This does not lead to deadlocks, because (1) lock is acquired conditionally, without waiting; and (2) object cannot be deinitializer twice, so graph of the deinit calls has no cycles.

### Interaction with distributed actors

> `deinit` declared in the code of the distributed actor applies only to the local actor and can be isolated as described above. Remote proxy has an implicit compiler-generated synchronous `deinit` which is never isolated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `deinit` declared in the code of the distributed actor applies only to the local actor and can be isolated as described above. Remote proxy has an implicit compiler-generated synchronous `deinit` which is never isolated.
```

### Interaction with task executor preference

> Ad-hoc job created for isolated synchronous deinit is executed outside a task, so task executor preference does not apply.

Reviewer 2: Yeah that's ok
